# GilliardLab Group Directory Setup

Before getting started, you will need an account on Supercloud and you will need to be added to the GilliardLab group directory by the group owner.

This setup guide will use the nano text editor as it is the most accessible for new users. However, you may use any text editor for this setup. The guide uses the dollar sign ('$') to indicate the prompt; you will enter all commands after the '$'.

We need to edit the .bashrc file of your account to access the group aliases and environment variables. Aliases are commands specific to the GilliardLab that enable running calculations more easily. Environment variables are used to assign the location of computational chemistry software so that they can be easily managed by the group owner.

To log in to Supercloud, use the following command:

```
$ ssh <username>@txe1-login.mit.edu
```

The .bashrc file is used to set up the working environment every time you log in to Supercloud. The period in front of the file name indicates it is a hidden file and can only be seen when explicitly requested. To view hidden files, use the following command:

```
$ ls -a
```

You will see a list of files and directories, including some that start with a period, such as .bash_history, .bashrc, .profile, etc.

To edit the .bashrc file using the nano text editor, use the following command:

```
$ nano .bashrc
```

At the end of the .bashrc file, add the following lines. Note that spacing is important, and the lines beginning with a period are indented. It is best to copy and paste the lines below into your .bashrc rather than typing them out to avoid typos.

```
export GILLIARDLAB=/home/gridsan/groups/gilliardlab

if [ -f $GILLIARDLAB/.config/gilliardlab_config/env_vars.sh ]; then
    . $GILLIARDLAB/.config/gilliardlab_config/env_vars.sh
fi

if [ -f $GILLIARDLAB/.config/gilliardlab_config/aliases.sh ]; then
    . $GILLIARDLAB/.config/gilliardlab_config/aliases.sh
fi
```

To save this file in nano, press Ctrl+X, then Y, and then Enter.

Now, log out of Supercloud and log back in.

To test if the aliases are working, type:

```
$ alias
```

You should see a list of aliases. It should look something like this (note that this list was current at the time of writing):

```
$ alias
alias copyg16='cp $GILLIARDLAB/opt/utilities/slurm_scripts/slurm_gaussian16.sh'
alias copyorca='cp $GILLIARDLAB/opt/utilities/slurm_scripts/slurm_orca504.sh'
alias stream='less -S +F'
```

To test if the environment variables are set, type:

```
$ echo $ORCA_PATH
```

You should see something like this:

```
$ echo $ORCA_PATH
/home/gridsan/groups/gilliardlab/gilliardlab_shared/opt/chemistry/Orca_504
```
